Welcome back to the course, new chapter:
Topological sort. Before we talk about what is
topological sort, let me introduce this chapter
with an example that will show you a concrete
situation where what we will learn through this
chapter can be useful. Imagine that you want to
take a bunch of courses. But, some of them are
prerequisites for others, for example you first
need to take Calculus 1 and Intro to Programming
before being able to take Discrete Math,
or for example you need to take Physics 1 before
being able to take Physics 2. So you have a list
of courses you want to take, and a list of
pairs (a,b), each pair (a,b) means that a is a
prerequisite for b. If there was no prerequisites,
we would be able to take courses in any order we
want, but because there are prerequisites, we have
to respect them, for example we can't take Linear
Algebra before Calculus 2. This is why we want to
find a linear ordering of courses that respects
all prerequisites, we want to know in what order
do we take the courses, what's the first course
we take, then what to take after it, and so on. We
want to find an ordering such that for each pair
(a,b), a comes before b in the ordering, to be
sure that we won't try to take b before taking a.
For this example, here is a possible ordering.
How to find such ordering? First of all,
we need to represent the problem. Here we
have elements, courses, and relationships
between them, requirements. So we can think
of representing the problem with a graph,
where vertices are courses, and an edge from
u to v means that u is a prerequisite for v.
Here why did we use directed edges and
not undirected ones? Because it's a
one-way relationship, u is a prerequisite for
v doesn't mean that v is a prerequisite for u.
And what we're searching for is a linear ordering
of vertices in a way that for each edge (u,v),
v comes after u in the ordering. In
other terms, for each pair (u,v) that
says that u is a prerequisite for v,
v must not happen until u happens,
this is why we must find v after u in the
ordering, to respect the requirement. And such
an ordering is called a topological ordering, or a
topological sort, the main topic of this chapter.
For example if we have this graph, here is a
valid topological ordering, u comes before v for
each edge (u,v). But this ordering is not a valid
topological ordering, because 11 is a prerequisite
for 14, while 14 is coming before 11 in the
ordering, which is not allowed. Four important
questions now, is finding a topological ordering
always possible? Is a topological ordering unique?
How can we find a topological ordering? And what
are some applications of topological sort? First
question, is finding a topological ordering always
possible? The answer is no, like in this scenario.
We have these 3 courses D E and G, from the graph
we see that D is a prerequisite for G, G is a
prerequisite for E, and E is a prerequisite for D.
Try to find a topological ordering, I'm waiting.
We can't, it's impossible, we have an
interdependency. D must come before G, we also
know that G must come before E and E must come
before D, so D must come before D, contradiction.
And in the first chapter, if you remember,
something like this in a graph is called a cycle,
so the answer is that a topological ordering is
not possible when there is a cycle in the graph.
This is why in topological sort we
work with directed acyclic graphs,
directed because the relationship
is a one-way relationship,
and acyclic because a topological sort
is not possible when there is a cycle.
Second question, is a topological ordering
always unique? No, a graph can have multiple
valid orderings, for example here we had
this ordering, but this one is also valid,
and there exist other ones. So yeah
it can be unique but not always.
Third question, how can we
find a topological ordering?
To do so, there exist algorithms that find a
topological ordering starting from a graph,
we will learn about two topological sort
algorithms in next lectures of this chapter.
And last question, what are some
applications of topological sort?
We can imagine a lot of applications, first
one is the example we've seen at the beginning,
the problem of finding the order of courses
we want to take that respects prerequisites.
And we can extend this problem to a lot
of situations, for example in project
management we may have a set of tasks with some
dependencies. Like if we're building a house,
we can't paint the walls before building
them. With topological sort algorithms,
we can find an ordering of tasks
that respects those dependencies.
We can even do something more powerful, imagine
that we know the time required for each task,
it's written in blue, with topological sort we can
calculate the minimum amount of time to finish all
the tasks, while respecting all dependencies
obviously. Next example, detecting cycles.
Some graphs contain cycles and some graphs don't,
and to know if a given graph contains a cycle,
we can use topological sort. We start working
normally, we assume that there is no cycle, and if
while working we face a problem that we will cover
later, we deduce that there's a cycle. Another
example is with database tables. If you worked
with databases before, you should be familiar
with foreign keys, a field in a table that
references to the primary key of another table.
For example we have these two tables Author and
Book, we assume that an author can have multiple
books but a book has a single author. If we take
this book for example, its author id is 148.
And this 148 refers to the author whose
id is 148 in the Author table. In general,
the author_id of a book in the table Book should
represent an existing author in the table Author.
And to create this relationship between the
two tables, we use a foreign key, to say that
author_id in table Book references author_id in
table Author. It's what we write when declaring
the tables in MySQL for example, we declare Author
table normally, then when declaring Book table,
we add this line, FOREIGN KEY author_id
REFERENCES author_id of the table Author.
Okay but the problem is, Book table
references another table Author,
so we can't directly load Book table
without having loaded Author table before,
we have a kind of dependency here. We deduce
that we cannot load our tables in any order,
here we first need to load Author then we can
load Book. This example has two tables only,
but we can imagine a database schema with a lot of
tables and a lot of dependencies, here we can use
topological sort algorithms to find an ordering
of tables to load, that respects all constraints.
Last example, we can use topological sort to
find the shortest path in a DAG, directed acyclic
graph. In a weighted graph, we may want to know
the shortest path to go from a node A to a node B,
where the length of path is determined by the
sum of weights of its edges. It can represent
the total distance, the total cost, or something
else. We will have a whole chapter about that,
but just know that for the case of directed
acyclic graphs, we can use topological sort.
We've reached the end of this introduction,
we've seen what is topological sort,
when can we find one, is it unique, some
applications, and now get ready to start
learning about some algorithms that will produce
such orderings, see you in the next lecture.